# Installation


## Preparing for pyTEMlib

[pyTEMlib](https://github.com/pycroscopy/pyTEMlib) requires many commonly used scientific and numeric python packages 
such as numpy, h5py etc.
To simplify the installation process, we recommend the installation of
[anaconda](https://www.anaconda.com/distribution/) which contains most of the prerequisite packages,
[conda](https://conda.io/docs/) - a package / environment manager,
as well as an [interactive development environment](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Integrated_development_environment) - 
[Spyder](https://www.coursera.org/learn/python-programming-introduction/lecture/ywcuv/introduction-to-the-spyder-ide)


Please note that any other python installation will work too and that pypi will install all missing packages.

Compatibility

* pyTEMlib is compatible with python 3.8 onwards. Please raise an issue if you find a bug.
* We do not support 32 bit architectures
* We only support text that is UTF-8 compliant due to restrictions posed by HDF5

Terminal
--------
Installing, uninstalling, or updating pyTEMlib (or any other python package for that matter) can be performed using the ``Terminal`` application.
You will need to open the Terminal to type any command shown on this page.
Here is how you can access the Terminal on your computer:

* Windows - Open ``Command Prompt`` by clicking on the Start button on the bottom left and typing ``cmd`` in the search box.
  You can either click on the ``Command Prompt`` that appears in the search result or just hit the Enter button on your keyboard.

  * Note - be sure to install in a location where you have write access.  Do not install as administrator unless you are required to do so.
* MacOS - Click on the ``Launchpad``. You will be presented a screen with a list of all your applications with a search box at the top.
  Alternatively, simultaneously hold down the ``Command`` and ``Space`` keys on the keyboard to launch the ``Spotlight search``.
  Type ``terminal`` in the search box and click on the ``Terminal`` application.
* Linux (e.g - Ubuntu) - Open the Dash by clicking the Ubuntu (or equivalent) icon in the upper-left, type "terminal".
  Select the Terminal application from the results that appear.

Installing pyTEMlib
-----------------
1. Ensure that a compatible python distribution has been successfully installed
2. Open a `terminal <#terminal>`_ window.
3. You can now install pyTEMlib via  ``pip`` as shown below.
   Type the following command into the terminal / command prompt and hit the Return / Enter key:

   * pip:

     .. code:: bash

        pip install pyTEMlib



  
## Installing from a specific branch (advanced users **ONLY**)

Note that we do not recommend installing pyTEMlib this way since branches other than the master branch may contain bugs.

.. note::
   Windows users will need to install ``git`` before proceeding. Please type the following command in the Command Prompt:

   .. code:: bash

     conda install git

Install a specific branch of pyTEMlib (``dev`` in this case):

.. code:: bash

  pip install -U git+https://github.com/pycroscopy/pyTEMlib@main

  
Updating pyTEMlib
---------------

We recommend periodically updating your conda / anaconda distribution. Please see `these instructions to update anaconda <./external_guides.html#Updating-packages>`_.

If you already have pyTEMlib installed and want to update to the latest version, use the following command in a terminal window:

.. code:: bash

   pip install -U --no-deps pyTEMlib
  
If it does not work try reinstalling the package:

.. code:: bash

   pip uninstall pyTEMlib
   pip install pyTEMlib

## Other software
We recommend [HDF View](https://support.hdfgroup.org/products/java/hdfview/) for exploring HDF5 files generated by and used in pyTEMlib.
